Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric

Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric
Rice (milled) Wheat Wheat flour Maize Sorghum Cattail(Pearl) millet Foxtail millet Finger Millet Samai Ladies fingers Brinjal Papaya Banana green Bengaigram Cowpea Indian bean Broad beans Cluster beans Cucumber Greengram Mung Lentil Peas Redgram Agathi Cabbage Coriander leaves Drumstick Ash gourd Bitter gourd Bottle gourd Pumpkin Ribbed gourd Gingelly Sunflower Coconut Groundnut Mustard Chilies Turmeric





Fluid discharge from the bullock's eye 
Fluid is discharging from the bullock's eye.
What should be done?
There are many causes of fluid discharge from an animal's eye; out of those, following are the main causes.
1. The eyeball or the inner side of the eyelid gets hit and this causes swelling or a wound.
2. Infection caused by germs.
3. Having cancer of the eyelid or the eyeball.
The remedy depends on which of the above have caused the fluid discharge.
In case of cause 1 and 2, a cream that can be applied in the eye - neomycin cream or any other cream should be applied everyday, after cleaning the eye. 
In case of eye cancer, growth is seen on the eyelid or on the eyeball.
In such case, the only remedy is to surgically remove the growth by veterinary surgeons.


Bull's stomach has blown up
Bull's stomach has blown up.
Please suggest a remedy.
Following home remedies should be used when bull's stomach is blown up.
1. Mix 200 ml of groundnut oil with 30 ml of turpentine oil and feed this mixture to the bull.
2. Mix 500 ml of groundnut oil with 30 ml of milk and feed this mixture to the bull.
3. Medicines available from a medical shop: Feed 100 gm of Tipol / Teepol powder with water in a single dose or feed a liquid medicine called Tyrel with 100 ml of water. 

National Sample Survey
According to a National Sample Survey (NSS), the monthly per capita consumption of cereals in India has declined from 14 kg to 12 kg in rural areas over the period 1987.
This is despite the fact that at constant prices the monthly per capita consumer expenditure (MPCE) has risen by 6 percent in rural areas and by 13 percent in urban areas over the same period..
The all-India MPCE during 1997 was Rs. 459, while expenditure on food was Rs. 255 and expenditure on non-food items was Rs. 204.
In rural areas, the MPCE was Rs. 395, while expenditure on food items was Rs. 232 and expenditure on non-food items was Rs. 163 while in urban areas, the MPCE was Rs. 645, while expenditure on food items was Rs. 320 and expenditure on non-food items was Rs. 325.
The urban-rural disparity in MPCE was only 12 percent in Punjab but 100 percent in Maharashtra.
The average household size in the country was 5.0 in rural areas and 4.6 in urban areas in 1997.
NNMB Study
According to a survey conducted by National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) in 10 states which are A.P. and Gujarat and Karnataka and Kerala and M.P. and Maharashtra and Orissa and T.N. and W.B. and U.P. , the consumption was equal to the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) level though it was showing a failing tendency with years.
The intake of pulses and legumes has remained lower than RDA level.
The average intake of leafy vegetables, an inexpensive source of vitamins and minerals, was only one-third of RDA level, while the consumption of other vegetables was marginally lower than RDA levels.
The consumption of fruits has risen slightly during 1990-1997.
The daily intake of milk and milk products, visible fat, and sugar and jaggery was only half, half, and two-thirds of RDA levels respectively in 1997.
The intake of proteins was comparable to RDA but has fallen marginally since 1990.
In terms of calorific value of food, the intake is failing since 1982 and is below RDA.
The intake of iron is apparently normal but the bio-availability of iron in Indian diet is poor at 3 percent.
The intake of vitamin A varies from 30 to 60 percent of RDA in diets in different regions.
The intake of riboflavin is about two-thirds of RDA level.
The intake of vitamin C is satisfactory.

Search for Agricultural Policy and Programmes
Institute of Development Studies at Jaipur has taken up a comprehensive all-India research project 'Equity-driven trade and marketing policy strategies for improved performance of Indian Agriculture' on agricultural reforms with financial support from the Australian government.
The project will work out a package of agricultural policies and programmesto improve the efficient utilization of resourcesand food security for masses and reduction in regional disparities.
The non-availability of more land is a major constraint in the growth of agriculture.
There is a need to increase the cropping intensity from 134 to 140 percent and the value of output from Rs. 15326 to Rs. 17688 per hectare and the gross cropped area from 190 to 199 million hectares and fertilizer consumption from 14 to 20 million tonnes.
There is no scope for expansion in the net sown area.
There is a need to give more attention to high growth areas like animal husbandry and dairy and fishery and also improve and expand and upgrade the marketing and storage and distribution infrastructure and set up facilities for packaging and grading and certification of agricultural commodities.
Central Plan Outlay
The allocation for agriculture was hiked by 58 percent to Rs. 2854 crores from Rs. 1807 crores by enhancing outlays on irrigation and agricultural credit in the budget.
The outlay on watershed development programmes was raised from Rs. 517 crores in 1997 to Rs. 677 crores in 1998.
All the watershed development programmes implemented by different ministries were proposed to be unified to make a better utilization of funds.
The allocation for accelerated irrigation programme was enhanced by Rs. 200 crores.
the share capital of NABARD was raised from Rs. 1500 crores to 2000 crores with Rs. 100 crores contributed by the exchequer and Rs. 400 crores contributed by the RBI, in 1998-99.
This was done to enable NABARD to increase its leverage.
This was done to enable NABARD to obtain additional resources from the market to meet its credit needs for agriculture.
A sum of Rs. 264 crores was also provided for rehabilitation and recapitalisation of regional rural banks.
A provision of Rs. 60 crores was made for technology mission on cotton.
A provision of Rs. 100 crores was made for experimental crop insurance scheme.
A provision of Rs. 500 crores was made for rural infrastructure development fund of NABARD.
the subsidy on potassium and phosphatic fertilizers was increased in the budget.
the import duty on biopesticides was reduced in the budget.
excise duty on jute products was cut in the budget.
100 percent tax-exemption on biopesticide manufacturing units was granted In the budget.
duty on diesel-generating sets of power upto 10 HP was reduced in the budget.
the manufacture of agricultural implements in the small scale sector was dereserved in the budget to improve their quality.
During 1996-97, the share of private investment however rose from 63 percent to 81 percent.
This rise is attributed mostly to better terms of trade offered by the government to agriculture vis-a-vis industry.
The fall in public sector investment is attributed to increase in current expenditure to meet higher subsidies on food, fertilisers, electricity, irrigation, credit and other farm inputs.
In recent years public expenditure on maintenance of existing irrigation projects has gone up and investment on new projects has fallen.
Many of the projects are still awaiting completion because of cost overruns and non-availability of necessary timely funds.
It was proposed to raise the investment in agriculture to 18 percent of the total plan outlay in the Eighth Plan.
The actual investment turned out to be 10 percent.
The government also announced a scheme to issue Kisan Credit Cards to farmers.
The farmers will be able to obtain loans from designated banks on the basis of their land holdings for the purchase of seeds and Fertilizers and pesticides and any other inputs under the scheme.
The scheme will be open for about 1 lakh farmer families.
The procedural details of the scheme were to be worked out and announced by NABARD after working out the modalities.
The necessary refinance to the commercial and other banks for the implementation of the scheme was to be provided by NABARD.
The ministry of agriculture is expected to have spent only 1974 crore rupees in 1998 out of the budgetary allocation of 2854 crore rupees in 1998.
The central plan outlay for agriculture and rural development was raised by 47 percent over the revised estimate of 1998 to 2897 crore rupees.
The lesser expenditure in 1998 is attributed to long delays in execution of work plans by states.
Ninth Plan Projections
The demand for foodgrains in India is expected to rise to 220 million tonnes by the end of the Ninth Plan according to an earlier estimate.
The demand for household consumption in India is expected to rise to 185 million tonnes by the end of the Ninth Plan according to an earlier estimate.
The demand for food processing industries in India is expected to rise to 27 million tonnes by the end of the Ninth Plan according to an earlier estimate.
The demand for export in India is expected to rise to 7 million tonnes by the end of the Ninth Plan according to an earlier estimate.
The area under foodgrains was raised to 120 million hectares to meet this demand besides affecting the usual increases in the yield through the use of better quality seeds and effective pest and disease control.
The demand for fruits was expected to go up to 50 million tonnes.
The demand for vegetables was expected to go up to 95 million tonnes.
The demand for edible oils was expected to go up to 10 million tonnes.
The demand for sugar was expected to go up to 7 million tonnes
The foodgrain and edible oil target is not expected to be achieved.
There was a significant shortfall in public sector investment in agriculture in the Eighth Plan according to the Planning Commission.
This shortfall should be reversed in the Ninth Plan.
The target for agricultural growth should be fixed taking into account the gap in the domestic availability and the demand for domestic consumption and exports
The output of agricultural and allied products should grow at 352 percent to meet the domestic needs and to take advantage of the world market in value terms.
The world market offers significant opportunity to earn foreign exchange through exports.
The annual growth rate should be 45 percent.
This calls for an investment of 268300 crore rupees in the Ninth Plan.
The investment in the Ninth Plan is higher than the investment in the Eighth Plan.

India Agriculture
Agriculture is art, science, and industry of managing the growth of plants and animals for human use.
In a broad sense, agriculture includes cultivation of the soil and growing and harvesting crops and breeding and raising livestock and dairying and forestry.
Regional and national agriculture are covered in more detail in individual continent, country, state, and Canadian province articles.
Modern agriculture depends heavily on engineering and technology and on the biological and physical sciences. 
each of Irrigation and drainage and conservation and sanitary engineering is important in successful farming.
Irrigation and drainage and conservation and sanitary engineering are some of the fields requiring the specialized knowledge of agricultural engineers.
Agricultural chemistry deals with other vital farming concerns, such as the application of fertilizer and insecticides and fungicides and soil makeup and analysis of agricultural products and nutritional needs of farm animals.
Plant breeding and genetics contribute immeasurably to farm productivity.
Genetics has also made a science of livestock breeding.
Hydroponics is a method of soilless gardening.
In this method, plants are grown in chemical nutrient solutions.
Hydroponics may help to meet the need for greater food production as the world's population increases.
The packing, processing, and marketing of agricultural products are closely related activities also influenced by science.
Methods of quick-freezing and dehydration have increased the markets for farm products.
Mechanization which is the outstanding characteristic of agriculture in late 19th and 20th century, has eased much of the backbreaking toil of the farmer.
More significantly, mechanization has enormously increased farm efficiency and productivity.
However, Animals including horses and oxen and llamas and alpacas and dogs are still used to cultivate fields, harvest crops, and transport farm products to markets in many parts of the world.
Airplanes and helicopters are employed in agriculture for seeding and spraying operations for insect and disease control.
Airplanes and helicopters are employed in agriculture for transporting perishable products and fighting forest fires.
Radio and television disseminate vital weather reports and other information such as market reports that concern farmers.
Computers have become an essential tool for farm management.

INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
India has made lot of progress in agriculture since independence in terms of growth in output, yields and area under many crops.
It has gone through a green revolution, a white revolution, a yellow revolution and a blue revolution.
Today, India is the largest producer of milk, fruits, cashewnuts, coconuts and tea in the world, the second largest producer of wheat, vegetables, sugar and fish and the third largest producer of tobacco and rice.
The per capita availability of foodgrains has risen in the country from 350 gm in 1951 to about 500 gm per day now, of milk from less than 125 gm to 210 gm per day and of eggs from 5 to 30 per annum despite the increase in population from 35 crores to 95 crores.
However, India would have been in an even better position now both in terms of agricultural output and economic development had our planners given the required importance to its development it deserved in the early years since independence.
Even today, the farmers in India are able to obtain only 15 per cent of their requirements of agricultural credit from banks.
The various state seed corporations are able to produce only 1 0 per cent of the seeds required by our farmers.
At present only 23-30 per cent of the farmers are able to derive any benefits of extension services provided by various government agencies and every year about 20 per cent of the crop is lost due to mishandling, spillage, floods, droughts and pests and diseases.
In fruits and vegetables the loss is around 30 per cent.
The farmers are still being exploited by moneylenders who provide finance at exorbitant interest rates and there are cartels of traders who pay very little for their produce even in the well recognized mandies in the country.
Gross Capital Formation in Agriculture 
Though the overall growth of Indian economy has depended much upon the performance of agriculture, over the years, not much public investment has been made on its development.
There is a steady deceleration in public investment in gross capital formation in agriculture.
In 1980-81, the public investment as a percentage of gross capital formation in agriculture was 38.7 percent which fell to 16.2% in 1996-97.
During this period the share of private investment, however, rose from 61.3% to 83.8%.
This rise is attributed mostly to better terms of trade offered by the government to agriculture vis-a-vis industry.
The fall in public sector investment is attributed to increase in current expenditure to meet higher subsidies on food, fertilizers, electricity, irrigation, credit and other farm inputs rather than creating assets.
In recent years public expenditure on maintenance of existing irrigation projects has gone up and investment on new projects has fallen.
Many of the projects started in early 1980's are still awaiting completion because of cost overruns and non-availabilty of necessary timely funds.
In the 8th plan it was proposed to raise the investment in agriculture to 18.7% of the total plan outlay, but the actual investment turned out to be about 10-11% only.
Growth in Foodgrain Production
The foodgrain production in the 1950s rose in India because of expansion in area.
In the 1960s, the growth rate was very poor which resulted in large scale imports.
The development, production and use of better seeds increased the productivity of wheat in 1970s and rice in 1980s.
The eighties was also a period of green revolution which enabled India to become self-sufficient in foodgrain production and even a marginal exporter.
In the Nineties, however, the annual growth rate in production has fallen to 1.66 per cent from 3.54 per cent recorded in the eighties. 
This is a matter of serious concern for the country as this growth rate is just matching the annual growth rate of population and 40 percent of the population in the country is still living below the poverty line.
The production of foodgrains in the country fell to 192.4 million tonnes in 1997-98 from 199.4 million tonnes in 1996-97. 
The production of wheat dropped by 3.5 million tonnes and coarse cereals by 3 million tonnes.
The kharif 1998-99 crop was also no better.
However, the 1998-99 Rabi crop is expected to be good with a 5.2 million tonnes higher foodgrain output expected from it.
The crop is estimated at 96.5 million tonnes.
Agricultural ministry has projected a 1998-99 ouput of foodgrains at more than 200 million tonnes.
The union government had plans to cover about 2 million farmers in the country with a total credit of Rs. 168 crores in 1999 with'kisan cards'.
It has fixed interest rates on credit given to farmers through these cards at 13.26 per cent including tax on interest on the first Rs. 2 lakhs credit and , at 6.02 percent on amounts above Rs. 2.00 lakhs.

Agricultural Marketing
At present, most of the agricultural produce in the country is freely marketed through private trade operating in organized markets and mandies
Except for commodities like petroleum and coal and nitrogenous fertilizers and others whose prices are administered most agricultural commodity markets operate under the normal forces of demand and supply
In order to save the farmers from cartels of traders and encourage farmers to undertake the cultivation of certain specific crops like foodgrains and oilseeds and cotton and jute and tobacco and sugarcane and others the government also fixes minimum support and statutory prices for some crops and makes arrangements for their purchase on state account whenever their price fall below the support level
The role of the government normally is limited to protecting the interests of producers and consumers, only in respect of wage goods, mass consumption goods and essential goods
The government is promoting organized marketing of agricultural commodities in the country
To achieve this, the governments of many states and union territories have enacted necessary legislation for regulation of agricultural produce markets
The number of regulated markets in the country went up from 6,640 in 1990-91 to 6,968 in 1995-96 and 7,062 in 1996-97
The union government has also set up a number of organizations, under the aegis of ministry of agriculture and ministry of commerce, such as commodity boards, cooperative federations and export promotion councils for monitoring and boosting the production, consumption, marketing and export of various agricultural commodities
These include the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) for recommending minimum prices of certain commodities; the Food Corporation of India Ltd. (FCI), the Cotton Corporation of India Ltd. (CCI), the Jute Corporation of India Ltd. (JCI), the National Cooperative Development Corporation Ltd. (NCDC), the National Cooperative Marketing Federation Ltd. (NAFED), the National Tobacco Growers Federation Ltd. (NTGF), the Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation Ltd. (TRIFED), the National Consumers Cooperative Federation Ltd. (NCCF), etc for procurement and distribution of commodities; and the Tea Board, Coffee Board, Coir Board, Rubber Board, Tobacco Board, Spices Board, Coconut Board, Central Silk Board, the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), State Trading Corporation (STC), Agricultural & Processed Foods Export Development Authority (APEDA), Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA), the Indian Silk Export Promotion Council, the Cashewnuts Export Promotion Council of India (CEPC), etc for promotion of production and exports of specific commodities
The National Cooperative Union of India is an apex institution for cooperative Movement covering all types of cooperatives
It promotes and develops cooperatives by assisting groups of people in forming cooperatives
It also imparts cooperative education and organizes training programmes for managers and executives of cooperatives
NAFED is an apex cooperative marketing organization involved in procurement, distribution, export and import of select agricultural commodities
It is a central nodal agency of the government for undertaking price support operations for nonperishable commodities like pulses and oilseeds and for market intervention operations for perishable commodities like potatoes, onions, grapes, kinno, oranges, apples, eggs, chillies, black pepper, etc
During January 1997 to February 1998, NAFED undertook market intervention in 13 commodities
Most of the states in the country have set up Agricultural Produce Marketing Boards and Civil Supplies Corporations to deal with marketing and distribution of various commodities which are produced or sold in specific regions in the country
The union government provides financial and technical assistance to states in creation of infrastructural facilities in the markets including setting up of godowns in rural areas
Till the end of March 1997, grading standards have been prepared for 162 agricultural and allied commodities under the Agriculture Produce Act, 1937
In the Ninth Plan period, the Tamil Nadu government is expected to spend Rs. 100 crores on extension of agricultural marketing facilities in the state
The Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board has plans to invest Rs. 514 crores in setting up of market yards and godowns for agricultural and floricultural produce in the Ninth Plan period
The state government has prepared a master plan for the integrated development of 1,930 markets including 405 rural markets in the state
It is proposed to obtain 50 percent of the funds from the union government at 12 percent interest repayable in 14 years after a moratorium of two years for funding the development of 723 regulated markets
25 percent will be provided by the state government and 25 percent will be provided by the Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee
The Kerala government has undertaken a Rs 72 crore EU-assisted project to set up 6 wholesale markets specifically for marketing of Fruits and Vegetables agricultural produce
Of these 3 will be in urban areas and of these 3 will be in rural areas
In India more than 100 million tonnes of fruits and vegetable are produced and marketed through a number of rural markets
The urban areas identified include Anayara in Thiruvananthapuram, Muvattapuzha in Ernakulam and S Batheri in Wayanad
In recent years, the monopoly of Kerala is being lost in the case of number of crops like coconut, rubber, pepper, ginger, cardamom, cashewnut because of new p options coming up in various states with high yielding pi materials
At present 60 percent of the net sown area in Kerala is under rubber and coconut
The fall in their prices in 1998 affected the lives of nearly two-third of its agricultural workforce

Marketing of Fruit and Vegetables
In India more than 100 million tonnes of fruits and vegetables are produced and marketed through a number of rural,wholesale and terminal markets every year.
The market reforms in agricultural commodities have so far been limited mainly to foodgrains only.
The marketing of fruits and vegetables has so far received little attention of the government.
At present, there are a large number of intermediaries in this trade between the producer and consumer which has resulted in a wide gap in the producer and consumer price of these commodities which needs to be reduced to enable farmers receive remunerative prices for their produce and boost their production and consumption in the country.
The union government has not made any common regulation for the marketing of fruits and vegetables applicable all over the country, however, some of the state governments have enacted laws and Acts.
The marketing of fruits and vegetables is under regulation in Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Bihar, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka and outside any regulatory purview in Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Jammu & Kashmir.
At present, the wholesale markets for fruits and vegetables on a country-wide basis are concentrated in 10 large cities viz Delhi, Calcutta, Bangalore, Chennai, Mumbai, Jaipur, Nagpur Vijayawada, Lucknow and Varanasi.
These cities account for the arrival of 75 percent of vegetables marketed in major urban areas in India.
Alone, Delhi, Calcutta, Mumbai and Pune account for the arrival of 55 percent of vegetables.
Delhi and Calcutta account for transit trade in 40 percent fruits and 13 percent vegetables.
Delhi, Calcutta and Mumbai receive 59 percent of total fruits and 46 percent of vegetables.
In a study carried out in 1998, it was found that cities with more than 20 lakh population account for transit trade in 66 percent of fruits and vegetables.
As per 1981 census, population exceeds 5 lakhs in 48 cities.
In those cities, there were 102 fruit and vegetable markets of which 54 were regulated.
The wholesale trade in fruits takes place in 65 markets and in vegetables in 81 markets.
Each market on an average serves a population of about 7 lakhs.
The prices in these markets are however governed by demand and supply principles while market committee does not play any role in correction or arresting wide price fluctuations.
Futures Trading
In continuation of the process of economic reforms, resumption of Futures Trading is receiving a renewed focus in the country.
The Kabra Committee, in its 1994 report, had recommended the allowing of futures trading in 17 commodities including kapas; raw jute and jute goods; seed, oil and oilcakes of groundnut, rapeseed/mustard, cottonseed, sesame, sunflower, copra and soyabean; ricebran oil; linseed; onions; and silver.
Futures trading in gur, potato, raw jute, turmeric, pepper and castorseed has been going on since long in the country.
More recently the union government has allowed futures trading in coffee, castor oil, jute sacking and cotton and has also permitted futures trading in palmolein, oilseeds and oilmeals subject to completion of certain formalities.
The futures trading in cotton was resumed after a gap of about 32 years at the Cotton Exchange Building in Mumbai on December 6, 1998.
An international futures exchange in pepper has started operating in the country and for castor was expected to begin in May 1999 in Navi Mumbai.

Question: Mango tree has been affected by stem borer pest. Due to this disease, the entire tree is drying up and the tree is barely 20 years old. So please suggest a remedy for this. Answer: Insert an iron rod into the hole in the tree and take the beetle or insect out of that hole. Then prepare a solution of petrol, 5 ml fenverlate and 10 ml Dichlorovous in 1 litre of water and pour it in the hole and plug the hole with soil.Question: Mango tree has been affected by stem borer pest.Due to this disease, the entire tree is drying up and the tree is barely 20 years old.So please suggest a remedy for this.Answer: Insert an iron rod into the hole in the tree and take the beetle or insect out of that hole.Then prepare a solution of petrol, 5 ml fenverlate and 10 ml Dichlorovous in 1 litre of water and pour it in the hole and plug the hole with soil.

Question: Sapota tree has been affected by termite pest. Please suggest a remedy for this. Answer: Mix 20 ml of Lindon / 50 ml of Chlorophyraphus + 25 mg of Blyton + 4 kg of ochre in 1 litre of waterand apply it on the trunk of the tree.Question: Sapota tree has been affected by termite pest.Please suggest a remedy for this.Answer: Mix 20 ml of Lindon / 50 ml of Chlorophyraphus + 25 mg of Blyton + 4 kg of ochre in 1 litre of waterand apply it on the trunk of the tree.

Soil for the cultivation of cabbage and cauliflower
What kind of soil is required for the cultivation of cabbage and cauliflower?
For the cultivation of cabbage and cauliflower, the soil should be medium black and should drain well.
The varieties of cabbage: Pride of India, early drumhead, Golden acre.
The varieties of cauliflower: Snowball 6, purata synthetics*.
The period for cultivation: September-October
Fertilisers and additional fertilisers: Use 40 to 50 carts of farm yard manure + 80 Kg nitrogen + 80 Kg phosphorus + 80 Kg potassium per hectare. 
Use 80 Kg of nitrogen 50 days after the cultivation.
Use 1 to 1.5 Kg weedicide called fluchloralin before sowing.
Chemical medicines: Use Neemark 5% fresh extract at an interval of 8 days.

Cold Storages
The number of cold storages (of more than 10 tonnes) in the country has gone up from 2,930 at the end of 1990-91 to 3,253 at the end of 1995-96 and their capacities have gone up from 7.68 million tonnes to 8.73 million tonnes.
The cold storages are being mostly used for the storage of agricultural commodities with potato being the largest stored commodity.
At present setting up of cold storages in India is not a lucrative activity because of high investment and low rental charges prevailing in the country.
In some of the states there are curbs on rental charges as they are fixed by the governments.
The NCDC provides financial assistance for setting up cold storages in the cooperative sector.
Till the end of March 1996, the NCDC had provided a total assistance of Rs. 79.97 crores for setting up of 248 cold storages with an installed capacity of 7.39 lakh tonnes.
In 1997, the union government repealed the Cold Storage Order, 1980.
Now no licence is required for setting up a cold storage as far as the union government is concerned.
This also means that no data will be available now on the total number of cold storages and their installed capacity in the country in the coming years.
According to a report prepared by an expert committee under the chairmanship of Mr. J.L.N. Srivastava, Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture, the present installed capacity, which needs to be raised to 123 lakh tonnes with an investment of Rs. 650 crores in the next 5 years, of cold storages in the country for the storage of potatoes is 103 lakh tonnes.
This can be done by setting up an additional capacity of 12 lakh tonnes and revamping a capacity of 8 lakh tonnes by rehabilitating some of the closed and sick cold storages.
The commitee had suggested setting up of 90 per cent of this additional capacity in the private sector and of this additional capacity 10 per cent in the cooperative/ private sector.
The committee has estimated the present installed capacity, which needs to be raised by 4.6 lakh tonnes in the coming 5 years, of the cold storage plants for onions at 4.5 lakh tonnes.
The committee has also suggested that the lending institutions should provide finance to cold storage plants at a concessional rate of 6 per cent, the excise duty on refrigeration plants and sandwich panels used for insulation be abolished.
The committee has recommended the replacement of present diffuser cooling system in cold storage plants by gravity/fin cooler system which saves power consumption by 20-25 per cent.
Accepting some of the recommendations of the committee, in the 1998-99 Budget, a credit-linked capital subsidy scheme for the construction of cold storages to be implemented by the ministry of agriculture with NABARD has been proposed.
There is a plan to create an additional cold storage capacity of 12 lakh tonnes and modernization/upgradation of existing 8 lakh tonnes capacity.
An additional capacity of 4.5 lakh tonnes for the storage of onions is also proposed to be created.
Insurance
In order to provide financial support to farmers in the event of crop failure due to drought, flood, etc and to restore the credit eligibility for the next crop season, a Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme (CCIS), which covered wheat, paddy, millets, oilseeds and pulses, was introduced in April 1985.
Under the scheme, half of the premium payable by small and marginal farmers is subsidised equally by the central and the state governments and indemnity claims are shared by the union government and state governments in the ratio of 2:1.
The premium is charged at the rate of 2 per cent for rice, wheat and millet and 1 per cent for pulses and oilseeds.
The participation in the scheme is voluntary and the states are free to opt or not to opt for the scheme.
The scheme covers only those farmers who avail crop loans from cooperative credit institutions, commercial banks and regional rural banks for producing rice, wheat, millets, oilseeds and pulses.
The sum assured equals to the crop loan disbursed subject to a maximum of Rs. 10,000 per farmer.
The scheme also covers indemnity towards loss in yield.
If the actual average yield in any area covered by this scheme fails short of the guaranteed yield, the farmer is entitled to an indemnity to the extent of shortfall in yield viz-a-viz the guaranteed yield.
The scheme is being administered by the General Insurance Corporation of India.
Since the inception of the scheme in 1985 to Rabi 1996-97 season about 5.82 crore farmers were covered under the scheme and claims of Rs. 1,523 crore were paid against premium collections of mere Rs. 269 crore.
Till the end of Rabi 1997-98 season the scheme covered 6.45 crore farmers and claims of Rs. 1,623 crore were paid against a premium collection of only Rs. 313 crores.
The scheme has proved its unviability and the ministry of Agriculture has been working quite some time on some alternate models for agriculture.
In 1998, the union government , formulated a ' Modified Crop Insurance Scheme (MCCIS)' which received an in-principle clearance for introduction from Kharif 1999 by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in November 1998.
In 1997, an 'Experimental Crop Insurance Scheme (ECIS)' , which was to cover besides loanee farmers, non-loanee small and marginal farmers also, was formulated for implementation in 24 districts for rabi 1997-98 crop.
However, the scheme could be implemented in only 14 districts in 5 States and covered only non-loanee farmers.
All the premium payable was subsidized by the central and the state governments in the ratio of 4:1 and the risks and indemnities were also shared by them in 4:1 ratio.
About 4.78 lakh farmers were covered for a sum insured of Rs. 172 crores.
This scheme also proved a failure as the premium collected was only 2.86 crores and claims paid amounted to Rs. 39.78 crores.
From kharif 1998-99, this scheme has been discontinued.
In the interim, the CCIS has replaced the ECIS in those districts where the latter is discontinued.
The CCIS is being implemented, at present, in 16 states and union territories.
Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh have not opted it.
The CCIS does not cover commercial crops like sugarcane, cotton, onions, potato, etc. 
The MCCIS, whose modalities are still being worked out may cover these crops also.
There is a proposal to set up a corporation to be called 'Agricultural Insurance Corporation of India' ' as a subsidiary of the General Insurance Corporation to manage its operations.
Under the MMCCIS, the farmers may have to pay premium as against the earlier schemes in which even the premium was being paid by the government.
For marginal farmers there will be concessions in premium charges.
The minimum support price will take care of the premium charges borne by farmers.
To start with the MMCCIS will be introduced in select districts and the MMCCIS will cover only foodgrains.
Later on it will be extended to all crops including oilseeds, horticulture, etc and all sorts of agricultural activities like fisheries, animal husbandry, sericulture, and so on. 
The scheme will be compulsory for farmers who avail loans from any government institution and optional for others.
Since past few years, the union government is also implementing a Livestock Insurance scheme, under which an animal is insured for its present market value or market value at the time of death whichever is lower.
In 1997-98, about 16.5 million animals were insured under this scheme.
A sum of Rs. 137.40 crore was received as premium and claims of Rs. 93.32 crore were disbursed by GIC which is implementing this scheme.

sap-sucking insect 
Please suggest a remedy for sap-sucking insect.
To control the sap-sucking insect, spray 20 ml Rogar, 10ml Quinolphos, 13 ml monochrotophos through 10 litre of water. 
For the insects that eat by biting, spray 20 ml Endosulphan, 50 ml carbaryl, 25 gm decamethene, 4 ml sarparmethene, N-45 through 10 litre of water.
For disease-control, spray alternately 25 gm Bavistin, 25 gm M-45, 25 gm sirum through 10 litre of water.

Green maggot on lablab 
Please suggest a remedy for green maggot on lablab.
To control green maggot on lablab, spray 250 ml of HaNPV per acre twice with a gap of 15 days. 
In between these two sprayings, spray the Neemark nishaudi* powder extract 5.
10 days later, spray 7 ml of spark / 10 litre.
H. A. N. P. V. is available in the university and Neemark powder is available at Krishi Vidnyan Kendra at the rate of Rs. 12 per Kg.

Question: Can gobar gas be generated again from the gobar gas slurry? Answer: Gobar gas can be generated from the slurry that comes out from the gobar gas plant. This slurry should be mixed with dung in the proportion of 25 to 50 per cent of the dung and then water should be added to it in a proper proportion. This mixture should contain water and solid matter in the proportion 1:1. The mixture should be passed in the gobar gas plant. If the slurry is passed in excess in the gobar gas plant, the acidity increases and the gobar gas may generate in lesser quantity. Question: Can gobar gas be generated again from the gobar gas slurry?Answer: Gobar gas can be generated from the slurry that comes out from the gobar gas plant.This slurry should be mixed with dung in the proportion of 25 to 50 per cent of the dung and then water should be added to it in a proper proportion.This mixture should contain water and solid matter in the proportion 1:1.The mixture should be passed in the gobar gas plant.If the slurry is passed in excess in the gobar gas plant, the acidity increases and the gobar gas may generate in lesser quantity.

Constituents in dung that form a fertilizer
Which constituents in dung form gas and an excellent fertiliser for agriculture? 
Dung contains 84% hosatile organic matter, 9.2% fat, 16% ash, 9.2% proteins, cipids, amino acids, ammonia, sugar, hydrocarbons, wax, starch as well as water and various types of bacteria. 
On an average, dung contains 84% nitrogen, 0.69% phosphorous, 1.28% potassium.

Ha in the dung cause its decay?
Due to the following various types of bacteria in the dung, gobar gas i.e. methane (CH4) is formed.
1. Methanobacterium Formicum
2. Methanobacterium Mobilis
3. Methanobacterium propionicum
4. Methanobacterium ruminantium
5. Methanobacterium soehngenii 
6. Methanobacterium suboxydans
7. Methanococcus Mazei
8. Methanococcus Vannielli
9. Methanosareina Barkerii
10. Methanococcus Methanica 

Constituents in the slurry
Which are the constituents in the slurry that comes out from a gobar gas plant?
The following are the constituents in the gobar gas slurry: on an average, nitrogen 1.5% phosphorous 0.75%, potassium 1.28%.

Phanerogamic parasites on mango tree 
The mango trees have become 24 - 25 years old and their branches have been affected by phanerogamic parasites.
Due to this,their ability to bear fruit has become very low.
As almost all the branches have been affected by the phanerogamic parasites it is not practical to cut them.
So please suggest a remedy to maintain their proper growth and to enable them bear as many fruits as possible.
To let the phanerogamic parasites to grow would not prove beneficial for the plant, hence they should be cut every now and then so that they do not grow.
A tree with the phanerogamic parasite on it, will not give a satisfactory yield even if large quantities of fertilizers are used.


Spots on mango leaves
Mango tree has been affected by a disease seen in the photo;
please suggest a remedy for this disease.
To control the spots on mango leaves, spray the solution of 25 gm Bavistin or 25 gm M-45 with 1 litre of water, once in 15 days.
Every year, mix 50 kg rotten farm yard manure + 1 kg of neemseed cake + 25 gm Azotobacter + 25 gm phosphorus-dissolving bacteria together and give this to a 5 year old tree or a fully grown tree in the rainy season if it is moist. 
In July, give 2.5 kg ammonium sulphate, 3 kg SSP, 2 kg sulphate of potash. 
Give 80 to 100 gm ferrous sulphate, 80 to 100 gm zinc sulphate, 80 to 100 gm magnesium sulphate, 80 to 100 gm manganese sulphate, 30 gm borax with the biogas slurry or with the mixture of dung and water.

Onion affected by aphis 
Onion has been affected by aphis. 
Please suggest a remedy.
To control the diseases called aphis and blackarm on onion, spray the solution of 20 ml Rogar + 25 gm Bavistin + 10 ml Sticker with 10 litre of water. 

Question: white grub worm that spreads through farm yard manure is causing damage to the crop. Please suggest a remedy for this. Answer 1: Remedy for white grub as follows: After taking out the compost from the pit, mix 50 to 100 gm carbaryl per cart and then sow this mixture in the field. Pick the white grub larvae and destroy them. Beetles flock on babhul or acacia tree and neem tree in the night; fell them down and kill them. Across the insect-affected area, spread 20 Kg of Folidol dust per hectare.Answer 2: Use the following remedies to control white grub larvae. Plough two times more than usual so that the white grub larvae and cocoons fall prey to their predators. The white grub larvae enter the field through farm yard manure or compost. The remedy for this is to mix 1Kg of 50% carbaryl with every cart of the manure. Collect and destroy the white grub larvae during intercultivation. Beetles that flock on the trees like neem, jujube, avacia or babhul tree after the first tropical** heavy rainfall should be collected and destroyed by drowning them in the kerosene-mixed water. Spray the solution of 20 gm of 50% carbaryl in 10 litre of water on the trees like neem, jujube,babhul tree. 2% methyl parathion dust should be mixed into the soil on the furrow, in the proportion of 100 Kg per hectareQuestion: white grub worm that spreads through farm yard manure is causing damage to the crop.Please suggest a remedy for this.Answer 1: Remedy for white grub as follows: After taking out the compost from the pit, mix 50 to 100 gm carbaryl per cart and then sow this mixture in the field.Pick the white grub larvae and destroy them.Beetles flock on babhul or acacia tree and neem tree in the night; fell them down and kill them.Across the insect-affected area, spread 20 Kg of Folidol dust per hectare.Answer 2: Use the following remedies to control white grub larvae.Plough two times more than usual so that the white grub larvae and cocoons fall prey to their predators.The white grub larvae enter the field through farm yard manure or compost.The remedy for this is to mix 1Kg of 50% carbaryl with every cart of the manure.Collect and destroy the white grub larvae during intercultivation.Beetles that flock on the trees like neem, jujube, avacia or babhul tree after the first tropical** heavy rainfall should be collected and destroyed by drowning them in the kerosene-mixed water.Spray the solution of 20 gm of 50% carbaryl in 10 litre of water on the trees like neem, jujube,babhul tree.2% methyl parathion dust should be mixed into the soil on the furrow, in the proportion of 100 Kg per hectare

Spider web on marigold
Spiders spin web on marigold plant and then the plant dries. 
Please suggest a remedy for this Species of the plant: Kafari.
Your marigold crop might have been affected by an arachnid called spider.
For this, spray the solution of 20 gm sulphur in 10 litre of water.
After that spray the solution of 5 ml of vertimec in 10 litre of water.
In between these two sprayings, keep spraying 5% of Neemark.
The marigold plant might have been affected by an arachnid called spider. 
Use the following remedies for its control: 
Spray 25 gm of sulphur powder 80% (sulphades / thiovit) or 10 ml ethion 50% (laser / dhanumil) in 10 litre of water.
Spray 20 ml dichophol 18.5% (laser / dhanumil) in 10 litre of water.
Spray 20 ml omite in 10 litre of water.


Red marigold bears yellow flowers 
Our Marigold plants have borne both red and yellow flowers on the same branch. 
However, the plants planted had red flowers and the seedlings for the red flower plants were made at home itself. 
Out of the flowers produced 99 per cent are yellow and yellow flowers fetch a very low market price. 
Why does this happen and what is the remedy for this?
The seeds might be adultrated; so get it tested. 
Also, get the soil-examination done and give the doses of fertilizers accordingly.

Question: Cauliflower has been affected by aphis. Cauliflower was planted 2 months ago. Please suggest a remedy for this and give full information about cauliflower cultivation.  Answer 1: Spray the translocated insecticide to control aphis on cauliflower. For this, spray the solution of 20 ml of 30 ec Rogar or 10 ml of Quinolphas in 10 litre water. In between the two sprayings of these insecticides, spray 5% extract of Neem powder.Answer 2: To control the aphis on cauliflower, spray the solution of 10 ml of any of the following insecticides with 10 litre of water.a) 50% Malathionb) 30% Dimethoatec) 25% Formethiond) 25% Odzidimeton Methyle) 25% ThiometonQuestion: Cauliflower has been affected by aphis.Cauliflower was planted 2 months ago.Please suggest a remedy for this and give full information about cauliflower cultivation.Answer 1: Spray the translocated insecticide to control aphis on cauliflower.For this, spray the solution of 20 ml of 30 ec Rogar or 10 ml of Quinolphas in 10 litre water.In between the two sprayings of these insecticides, spray 5% extract of Neem powder.Answer 2: To control the aphis on cauliflower, spray the solution of 10 ml of any of the following insecticides with 10 litre of water.a) 50% Malathionb) 30% Dimethoatec) 25% Formethiond) 25% Odzidimeton Methyle) 25% Thiometon

Question: Our chickpea plant has been affected by green and red maggot. It eats the apex of the seedling. Please suggest a remedy for this. Answer: To control the green maggots on chickpea, spray the solution of 200 ml H. N. P. V. + egg white of 8-10 eggs + 50-100 gm indigo + 300 ml Endosulphan + 200 litre water. 6-8 days later, spray 5% nimboli. After this, at the interval of 6-8 days, spray as mentioned above.Question: Our chickpea plant has been affected by green and red maggot.It eats the apex of the seedling.Please suggest a remedy for this.Answer: To control the green maggots on chickpea, spray the solution of 200 ml H. N. P. V. + egg white of 8-10 eggs + 50-100 gm indigo + 300 ml Endosulphan + 200 litre water.6-8 days later, spray 5% nimboli.After this, at the interval of 6-8 days, spray as mentioned above.

Question: I want to cultivate cabbage. So please give me detailed information regarding the seeds to be sown in a particular season and also the fertilizers and medicines to be used. Answer: The species of cabbage are Pride of India, Alidrumhead, Golden acre. For private*varieties of cabbage, please contact the nearby agricultural service centre. At the time of cabbage planting, use the following doses of fertilizers per hectare: 40 to 50 carts of farm yard manure, 175 Kg urea, 500 Kg single Super Phosphate, 130 Kg murate of potash. A month after the planting, 175 Kg urea should be used per hectare.Question: I want to cultivate cabbage.So please give me detailed information regarding the seeds to be sown in a particular season and also the fertilizers and medicines to be used.Answer: The species of cabbage are Pride of India, Alidrumhead, Golden acre.For private*varieties of cabbage, please contact the nearby agricultural service centre.At the time of cabbage planting, use the following doses of fertilizers per hectare: 40 to 50 carts of farm yard manure, 175 Kg urea, 500 Kg single Super Phosphate, 130 Kg murate of potash.A month after the planting, 175 Kg urea should be used per hectare.

Question: Onion has been affected by black and reddish aphis. What is the remdey for this? Answer: To control aphis on onion, use translocated insecticide. Spray 20 ml dimethoate / 10 litre water or 15 ml Metasistocs / 10 litre water or spray 3 percent neem extract with stickers like Sandowheat Triton / soap powder etc.  Spray twice with the gap of 6 days. Change the insecticide every time you spray.Question: Onion has been affected by black and reddish aphis.What is the remdey for this?Answer: To control aphis on onion, use translocated insecticide.Spray 20 ml dimethoate / 10 litre water or 15 ml Metasistocs / 10 litre water or spray 3 percent neem extract with stickers like Sandowheat Triton / soap powder etc.Spray twice with the gap of 6 days.Change the insecticide every time you spray.

Question: Onion has been affected by blight. Please suggest a remedy. Answer:To control the diseases called aphids and blight on onion, spray the solution of 20 ml Rogar + 25 gm Bavistin + 10 ml Sticker with 10 litre of water. Question: Onion has been affected by blight.Please suggest a remedy.Answer:To control the diseases called aphids and blight on onion, spray the solution of 20 ml Rogar + 25 gm Bavistin + 10 ml Sticker with 10 litre of water.

Fertilisers for onion 
Which fertilisers should be used after the second weeding of the onion crop?
At the time of transplantation, the fertilizers for onion to be used by mixing into the soil per hectare are 25 carts of farm yard manure, 100Kg Urea, 600 Kg single super phosphate and 80 Kg murate of potash. 
After one month, after the weeding 175 Kg Urea should be used per hectare.


Leaves of mango
Why do leaves at the apex of mango tree get burnt?
If the new leaves at the apex of a mango tree are getting burnt mainly because of a fungus, then spray 0.5% Bordo mixture. Spray the solution of 25 gm M-45 in 10 litre water, once in 15 days.


newly developed varieties
From where the newly developed varieties for the following crops should be obtained?
1. Jvala chilli
2. onion
3. marigold and aster flowers
4. ridge gourd
The species and seeds of the said crops are available at Mahatma Fule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri, District Ahmadnagar and at Kokan Krishi Vidyapeeth, Dapoli, District Ratnagiri.
For the seeds developed by private companies, contact nearby agriculture service centre. 
Also, visit the agricultural exhibition that is set in Pune every year in December.
 

Information about muskmelon
Why does muskmelon require a relatively high amount of spraying of medicines? 
Which is a good medicine and a good seed for muskmelon?
There can be many reasons for musk melon to require a relatively high amount of spraying of medicines: occurrence of the pest and disease, nutrient deficiency, etc.


Information about dairy business 
Please give information about dairy business.
As the information about the dairy business is vast,it is not possible to present it here in short.
Please register at our centre and receive the comprehensive training so that you acquire full information about dairy business.

Lokari Mawa on sugercane
What is the effective remedy to prevent Lokari Mawa on sugercane from frequently occurring?
To control Lokari Mawa on sugercane, spray twice, the mixture of 10 ml endosulphane + 20 ml acephate and 10 ml endosulphane + 20 ml metasistac with 10 litre of water; and then dust the folidol dust in the proportion 20 kg per hectare.

Onion produced in black soil
Our land has black soil. 
It does not produce onion of a good quality.
The onion does not attain a substantial size. 
What remedy should we use?
Onion can be produced in black soil. 
But it requires that the soil drains well.


Dropping of mango blossom 
The mango blossom is dropping, so please suggest a remedy for this. 
If dropping of mango blossom is due to excessive spreading of jassid or powdery mildew, then spray the solution of each of the following combinations in 10 litre of water: 15 ml Endosulphan / 20 ml Quinolphos + 25 gm Bavistin / 25 gm M-45 or dust the mixture of 10% Carboryl + 300 mesh sulphur in 1:1 proportion. 



Thrips on onion
Onion gets affected by thrips. Please suggest a remedy for this.
Crop: onion
Type of soil: black
Age of the crop: 4 months
Medicines used: Farasa
Use translocated insecticide to control thrips on onion.
For this, spray one of the following insecticides through 500 litre of water, twice per hectare: 575 ml Endosulphan 35 E.C., 600 ml Quinolphos 25 E.C., 550 ml Monochrotophos 35 W E.C.
Soak nimboli powder in water overnight and filter it next morning.
Mix this filtrate with 90 litre of water and use it for spraying.


Improved varieties of jowar and pearl millet
Which are the improved varieties of jowar and pearl millet? Which are their major diseases and the remedies for these diseases?
Improved varieties of jowar: Phule Yashoda, Mauli, Selection 3 C S V 14 R
Improved varieties of pearl millet: Shraddha Saburi A C T P 8203 etc.

Grapes turn dry 
During the season of grapes, bunches of grapes turn dry and appear to be affected by blackarm. 
Please suggest a remedy for this.
Bunches of grapes dry and drop if sap-sucking pest has spread excessively or if the plant has caught blackarm. 
To control the sap-sucking pest, spray once or twice the solution of 20 ml Roger with 10 litre of water, 13 ml Chloropyriphos with 10 litre of water or 10 ml Quinolphos with 10 litre of water. 
In case of fungicides, for controlling fungus, spray the solution of 20 - 25 gm of fungicide containing sulphur with 10 litre of water or Belton water.
For Mosaic, 10 - 12 gm Ridomil with 10 litre of water, and for blackarm, 25 gm Carbondizim with 10 litre of water or 20 gm Benlet with 10 litre of water should be sprayed alternatively 2 - 3 times.
Feed the grape vine properly.


Bark of Mango tree
As the bark of mango tree cracks, its leaves start burning.
Due to this, the tree does not grow in height. 
Please suggest a remedy for this. 
Out of many causes of cracking the bark of the trunk of mango, some causes are: excessive spreading of thrip, or excessive spreading of nematodes, deficiency ofwater or food. 
For this, plant should be watered according to the quality of soil, the season and the requirement of the plant. 
To control the jassid, dust 10 per cent carbaryl powder, spray the solution of 3 ml monochrotophos in 10 litre of water. 
If the diseases like anthracnose, kolato, blackarm etc.have spread excessively,spray the solution of 25 gm of M-45 in 10 litre of water twice.
If the nematodes have spread excessively, give 50 gm of paciliomysis with 1 - 2 baskets of the farm yard manure to each plant, twice a year. 
The trunk of the mango should be drenched with 1 per cent bordo-mixture. 
1 per cent bordo-mixture, ochre, dung,urine should be applied on the trunk,twicea year

Flowers of sapodilla tree drop 
Sapodilla tree has fully grown but its flowers do drop. 
Also, the fruit does not grow in size. 
Please suggest a remedy for this.
Use fertilizers according to the soil-examination. 
Select the grafts from a reliable place and that are made from an excellent sorce plant.
Let the water drain properly.


Foot and mouth disease of a bullock
Our bullock is suffering from the foot and mouth disease. 
It has got boils on the tongue. 
Due to this, it does not eat anything. 
Please, suggest a remedy for this as soon as possible. 
Also the bullock has become weak since it has not eaten anything; 
what medicine should be given so that it gains strength. And what should it be fed with?
From the symptoms as well as photos sent by you, it seems that your bullock is suffering from a viral disease - 'foot and mouth disease'. 
Foot and mouth disease is a viral disease. 
This disease is found in cows, buffaloes, goats and sheep. 
In this disease, the mortality rate for hybrid calves is found to be 15 to 60 per cent. 
The dairy cattle give lesser milk or stop giving milk. 
In severe illness, the animal dies.
Symptoms of the illness :
1. The animal catches high fever.
2. The animal does not eat or drink anything.
3. The animal turns black and feeble.
4. Boils are seen in the mouth, on the tongue and on the gums of the animal.
5. Saliva and foamy substance come out of the mouth continuously.
6. Bright red wounds are developed due to removal of scab from the boils in the mouth.
7. Boils develop in the space between the fingers of foot of the animal and then burst.
8. The animal hobbles.
9. The animal gasps.
Precaution and remedy :
1. The infected animal should be quarantined.
2. Other animals should not be fed the food and water tasted by the infected animal.
3. Vaccination against the foot and mouth disease should be done regularly .
4. The infected animal's mouth should be cleaned with potassium water; glycerine should be applied to its tongue and to the wounds in the mouth.
5. 'Himex' ointment should be applied.
6. Coriander should be dipped in groundnut oil and fed to the animals.
7. The animal should not be fed rough fodder; it may cause wounds in the animal's mouth.
8. The animal should be fed soft and leafy fodder.
9. Do not walk the sick animal through dust.
10. Do not use any desperate remedy; consult an expert veterinary surgeon.
11. Spray lime water in the cattleshed.
12. Feed the animal wheat-gruel or bajra-gruel so that it gains energy.

Question: The cucumber crop has been affected by a disease called downy mildew and the leaves have turned yellow. Which medicines should be used for this? What precaution should we take so that the disease does not affect the crop.Variety of crop - ShivaneriMethod - OrganicFertilizers - Organic fertilizers have been used. Answer: 1) Spray 1 per cent Bordo mixture (solution of 1 Kg slaked lime + 1 Kg blue vitriol in 100 litre water (pH =7)) twice, with a gap of 15 days.OR    Spray twice the solution of 20 gm Metalaxil* / Dithen Z 72* with 10 litre water, with a gap of 15 days.2) Give 1 or 2 litre solution of 20 gm Bavistin with 10 litre water to the diseased plants, at the time of each spraying.3) Use pure seeds to prevent the disease. Ensure that the fungus of the disease does not spread in the field. Ensure that the spores of fungus do not come along with diseased water, animals and farm implements from the surrounding fields. Make the soil for crop cultivation germfree.4) From the photographs attached, it also appears that the leaves lack nutrients - nitrogen, iron etc., so use proper fertilizers in proper proportion.Question: The cucumber crop has been affected by a disease called downy mildew and the leaves have turned yellow.Which medicines should be used for this?What precaution should we take so that the disease does not affect the crop.Variety of crop - ShivaneriMethod - OrganicFertilizers - Organic fertilizers have been used.Answer: 1) Spray 1 per cent Bordo mixture (solution of 1 Kg slaked lime + 1 Kg blue vitriol in 100 litre water (pH =7)) twice, with a gap of 15 days.OR    Spray twice the solution of 20 gm Metalaxil* / Dithen Z 72* with 10 litre water, with a gap of 15 days.2) Give 1 or 2 litre solution of 20 gm Bavistin with 10 litre water to the diseased plants, at the time of each spraying.3) Use pure seeds to prevent the disease. Ensure that the fungus of the disease does not spread in the field. Ensure that the spores of fungus do not come along with diseased water, animals and farm implements from the surrounding fields. Make the soil for crop cultivation germfree.4) From the photographs attached, it also appears that the leaves lack nutrients - nitrogen, iron etc., so use proper fertilizers in proper proportion.

Question: Green ChillyVariety: Nirmal 12 hybrid Jwala chillyAge: One and a half monthAt the time of cultivation 2 tons of 'excreta of fowl' was used as a fertilizer for half an acre. The green chilly has been affected by diseases called Leaf curl, Wilt and Blight. Please send the information about the chemicals to be sprayed and the number of sprayings, and the proportion and the schedule of the sprayings. Answer: To control chilly diseases called Leaf curl, Wilt and Blight, the following remedy  should be used.20 ml Roger + Bavistin per 10 litre of water, 20 gm Copper Oxychloride + 20 gm Zynib per 10 litre of water, 20 gm M-45 + 13 ml Monochrotophas per 10 litre of water, 4 ml Confidor per 10 litre of water should be sprayed.Between two sprayings, 5 per cent extract of neem powder should be sprayed.Maintain a gap of approximately 7 to 8 days between two consecutive sprayings.For Wilt, half to one litre of the solution of 1 per cent Bordo mixture (1 Kg lime + 1 Kg blue vitriol in 100 litre water) should be given to each plant, with the gap of 8 days. Next, 10 to 20 gm Trichoderma mixed with farm yard manure should be given to each plant. The quantity of water supplied should be such that the soil always remains moist. As far as fertilizers are concerned, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium should be given in the proportion 100:50:50, 100 Kg per hectare. If drip system is available, fertilizers should be given through water.Question: Green ChillyVariety: Nirmal 12 hybrid Jwala chillyAge: One and a half monthAt the time of cultivation 2 tons of 'excreta of fowl' was used as a fertilizer for half an acre.The green chilly has been affected by diseases called Leaf curl, Wilt and Blight.Please send the information about the chemicals to be sprayed and the number of sprayings, and the proportion and the schedule of the sprayings.Answer: To control chilly diseases called Leaf curl, Wilt and Blight, the following remedy  should be used.20 ml Roger + Bavistin per 10 litre of water, 20 gm Copper Oxychloride + 20 gm Zynib per 10 litre of water, 20 gm M-45 + 13 ml Monochrotophas per 10 litre of water, 4 ml Confidor per 10 litre of water should be sprayed.Between two sprayings, 5 per cent extract of neem powder should be sprayed.Maintain a gap of approximately 7 to 8 days between two consecutive sprayings.For Wilt, half to one litre of the solution of 1 per cent Bordo mixture (1 Kg lime + 1 Kg blue vitriol in 100 litre water) should be given to each plant, with the gap of 8 days.Next, 10 to 20 gm Trichoderma mixed with farm yard manure should be given to each plant.The quantity of water supplied should be such that the soil always remains moist.As far as fertilizers are concerned, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium should be given in the proportion 100:50:50, 100 Kg per hectare.If drip system is available, fertilizers should be given through water.

Question: Cucumber has been affected by fungus. Leaves have shrunk. The plant has withered. Also, the growth of some plants has completely stopped.variety - Shivneriage - 1 monthsoil - Lightfertilizer - 19:19:19 dose has been given.Question: The remedy suggested by you helped us a lot. We could save our cucumber crop. But now the cucumber is having thorns on it. What is the remedy for this? Also, it injures the hands of the persons who cut the crop. Answer: To control the fungal diseases on cucumber, spray the solution of 25 gm Bavistin or M-45 or di-thane Z-78 or Calaxine with 10 litre of water, 3 times with a gap of 10 days. For the proper growth of the plant, spray 1% extract of 18:46 fertilizer twice with a gap of 15 days. Micronutrient fertilizers should be sprayed twice with a gap of 15 days.Having thorns on cucumber, is the characteristic of a particular variety. As there are no other scientific remedies for this, you should better contact the company's dealer for the concerned seed variety.Question: Cucumber has been affected by fungus.Leaves have shrunk.The plant has withered.Also, the growth of some plants has completely stopped.variety - Shivneriage - 1 monthsoil - Lightfertilizer - 19:19:19 dose has been given.Question: The remedy suggested by you helped us a lot.We could save our cucumber crop.But now the cucumber is having thorns on it.What is the remedy for this?Also, it injures the hands of the persons who cut the crop.Answer: To control the fungal diseases on cucumber, spray the solution of 25 gm Bavistin or M-45 or di-thane Z-78 or Calaxine with 10 litre of water, 3 times with a gap of 10 days.For the proper growth of the plant, spray 1% extract of 18:46 fertilizer twice with a gap of 15 days.Micronutrient fertilizers should be sprayed twice with a gap of 15 days.Having thorns on cucumber, is the characteristic of a particular variety.As there are no other scientific remedies for this, you should better contact the company's dealer for the concerned seed variety.

Question: The brinjal is affected by tip borer. So, please give me a proper guidance.Now, the plants have budded.Medicine used: NuclearFertilizer used: Per acre, 10 trailers of farm yard manure Answer: You have said that you have used many medicines to control the maggot that bores the tip and fruit of brinjal. But it was not controlled as desired. Your brinjal crop is 5 months old. Therefore, it is possible that it is affected by a pest to some extent. So, use 2 light traps per acre to control the pest. Also, remove all the rotten fruits and tips and destroy them. Later, spray a chemical medicine a few times. Use the medicines alternately at every spraying. Between two consecutive sprayings, spray 5 percent neem seed extract (5 Kg neem seed powder / 1000 litre water). Every time, use a sticky solution in the solution for spraying. The spraying should be done either in the morning or in the evening. In this way, control the pest. Prepare a light trap as shown in the picture below and place it in the crop.Question: The brinjal is affected by tip borer.So, please give me a proper guidance.Now, the plants have budded.Medicine used: NuclearFertilizer used: Per acre, 10 trailers of farm yard manure Answer: You have said that you have used many medicines to control the maggot that bores the tip and fruit of brinjal.But it was not controlled as desired.Your brinjal crop is 5 months old.Therefore, it is possible that it is affected by a pest to some extent.So, use 2 light traps per acre to control the pest.Also, remove all the rotten fruits and tips and destroy them.Later, spray a chemical medicine a few times.Use the medicines alternately at every spraying.Between two consecutive sprayings, spray 5 percent neem seed extract (5 Kg neem seed powder / 1000 litre water).Every time, use a sticky solution in the solution for spraying.The spraying should be done either in the morning or in the evening.In this way, control the pest.Prepare a light trap as shown in the picture below and place it in the crop.

We want to cultivate corn. The soil is black. Please let us know about the best available corn seeds. Also let us know about planting, fertilizer doses, and watering schedule. Varieties:Hybrid variety: Ganga 11. Growth period: 100 to 110 days.  Hybrid variety: Deccan 105. Growth period: 100 to 110 days.  For green fodder: African Tall. Growth period: 70 to 80 days.Other varieties: Proagro 4640, Decalp Highshill, Mahendra 990 and Suvarna. Quantity: 15 to 20 kg per hectare (6 to 8 kg per acre).  Fertilisers and the time of their application: 1) Before planting: 10 to 12 tons of farm yard manure.2) At the time of planting: 35 kg urea, 150 kg single super phosphate, 32 kg sulphate of potash.3) 25 days after the planting: 35 kg urea.4) 45 days after the planting (when crop has grown to the ear-shoot level): 35 kg urea.Water: Crop should be kept moist before the start of and upto the flowering stage.Weed killers : 2-3 days after the planting, spray 'Lasso' (alachlor) 50 E. C.* 1 litre + Atrataf (Atrazine) 250 gram, with 250 litres of water per acre on wet soil.Note: Among the species mentioned above, Suvarna is recommended.Question: I want to cultivate chilli in the summer.Please guide me about the variety to be selected and the way it should be cultivated.Also, give information about capsicum.Answer: Information about new varieties of chilli and the methods of their cultivation: 1) The university has invented the improved varieties of chilli, namely, Phule Sai, Phule Jyoti, Phule Mukta, Phule Suryamukhi. Besides, the hybrid varieties called Maina (Nirmal), Namadhari, Sitara (Seminis) are cultivated.2) Between two saplings, keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq. cm for a hybrid variety.3) Prepare the saplings on a rise bed. Use 400 gm seeds per acre, for an improved variety and 130 gm seeds per acre, for a hybrid variety.4) At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailers of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash.5) Give 2.5 sacks of urea divided in 3 parts.6) Besides, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate.7) Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P.  S.  B.  and Trichoderma.8) Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days.9) Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety.10) Spray 500 gm of a water soluble fertilizer with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.11) Spray according to the type of diseases and pests.

Question: We need complete information about watermelon cultivation. Also, please give information about the fertilizers to be used, schedule for watering, possible diseases and their remedies.We have bought the seeds called Bio-Sheetal from Bio Seeds. Answer: Information about watermelon cultivation: You have purchased seeds of a hybrid variety.Cultivation should be done during December 20 to January 15. The soil should be ploughed and harrowed.The rows should be made keeping a distance of 2 to 2.5 ft. The water basins should be made on both the sides of the row keeping a distance of 1 meter. 2-3 seeds should be sown and 2 saplings should be planted in the water basin.4 kg each of decayed farm yard manure and Linden powder, 2.5 sacks of Super Phosphate, 30 kg potash, 200 kg neem cake, 4 kg of each zinc sulphate, magnesium sulphate and ferrous sulphate, per acre should be mixed in the basin.10 days later, 2 kg of each P. S. B., Azotobacter and Trichoderma, per acre should be given. A week later, 4 sacks of ammonium sulphate, per acre should be given in 3 steps, with a gap of 15 days. The fertilizers should be given according to soil-examination, by ring method.Remedies to control the diseases and pests: 1) Red beetles: 15 gm water-soluble Linden powder and 20 ml Malathion should be sprayed per 10 litre water.2) Fruit fly: The rotten fruits should be burnt. 20 ml Malathion + 100 gm jaggery should be sprayed with 10 litre water. The protector trap made by Kokan Krishi Vidyapeeth should be used.3) Leaf miner: 4 kg Phoret* or Thimate*, per acre should be mixed in the soil. 5 ml Cypermethrin should be sprayed per 10 litre water. 4 kg neem seed extract should be mixed in 100 litre water, filtered and sprayed.4) Powdery mildew: 5 gm Calaxine* or 10 ml Carathin or 10 gm Bavistin should be mixed in 10 litre water and sprayed. The crop should be watered in such a quantity that the moisture in the soil is maintained. The water should be allowed to drain in the soil. Precaution should be taken so that the vine does not wet. The fruits should be covered with dry grass. They should be protected from the Sun.Question: We need complete information about watermelon cultivation.Also, please give information about the fertilizers to be used, schedule for watering, possible diseases and their remedies.We have bought the seeds called Bio-Sheetal from Bio Seeds.Answer: Information about watermelon cultivation: You have purchased seeds of a hybrid variety.Cultivation should be done during December 20 to January 15. The soil should be ploughed and harrowed.The rows should be made keeping a distance of 2 to 2.5 ft.The water basins should be made on both the sides of the row keeping a distance of 1 meter.2-3 seeds should be sown and 2 saplings should be planted in the water basin.4 kg each of decayed farm yard manure and Linden powder, 2.5 sacks of Super Phosphate, 30 kg potash, 200 kg neem cake, 4 kg of each zinc sulphate, magnesium sulphate and ferrous sulphate, per acre should be mixed in the basin.10 days later, 2 kg of each P. S. B., Azotobacter and Trichoderma, per acre should be given.A week later, 4 sacks of ammonium sulphate, per acre should be given in 3 steps, with a gap of 15 days.The fertilizers should be given according to soil-examination, by ring method.Remedies to control the diseases and pests: 1) Red beetles: 15 gm water-soluble Linden powder and 20 ml Malathion should be sprayed per 10 litre water.2) Fruit fly: The rotten fruits should be burnt. 20 ml Malathion + 100 gm jaggery should be sprayed with 10 litre water. The protector trap made by Kokan Krishi Vidyapeeth should be used.3) Leaf miner: 4 kg Phoret* or Thimate*, per acre should be mixed in the soil. 5 ml Cypermethrin should be sprayed per 10 litre water. 4 kg neem seed extract should be mixed in 100 litre water, filtered and sprayed.4) Powdery mildew: 5 gm Calaxine* or 10 ml Carathin or 10 gm Bavistin should be mixed in 10 litre water and sprayed. The crop should be watered in such a quantity that the moisture in the soil is maintained. The water should be allowed to drain in the soil. Precaution should be taken so that the vine does not wet. The fruits should be covered with dry grass. They should be protected from the Sun.

Question: Fenugreek has been sown 15 days ago. The tips of fenugreek are scorching. Please suggest a remedy for this. Answer: Use the remedies after identifying the cause behind scorching of the tips of fenugreek.If the tips are scorching due to a pest, use a translocated insecticide. For example, spray 20 ml Dimethoate* or 13 ml Monochrotophos, per 10 litre water. If the tips are scorching due to a disease, spray 0.5 percent Bordo mixture (0.5 kg EC Bordo per 100 litre water) or 25 gm copper oxychloride and then 15 gm Bavistin + 10 gm M-45 per 10 litre water.Question: Fenugreek has been sown 15 days ago.The tips of fenugreek are scorching.Please suggest a remedy for this.Answer: Use the remedies after identifying the cause behind scorching of the tips of fenugreek.If the tips are scorching due to a pest, use a translocated insecticide.For example, spray 20 ml Dimethoate* or 13 ml Monochrotophos, per 10 litre water.If the tips are scorching due to a disease, spray 0.5 percent Bordo mixture (0.5 kg EC Bordo per 100 litre water) or 25 gm copper oxychloride and then 15 gm Bavistin + 10 gm M-45 per 10 litre water.

Question: Crop: OnionVariety: GavaranOnion has been cultivated and the medicines have been used as you had suggested earlier. In spite of this, tips of the onion leaves are scorching. So, please suggest a remedy for this. Answer: Find out the exact cause of scorching the tips of onion leaves and use a remedy accordingly. If a disease appears, spray 0.5% Bordo mixture twice, with a gap of 8 days. If the pests appear, spray 20 gm Aciphate or 20 ml Metasystox with 10 litre water. If the onion crop is 1 to 1.5 months old, give the fertilizers as recommended. For spraying, use 5% neem seed extract, intermittently. Use organic fertilizers. Spray a fertilizer containing micronutrients, twice (e.g. 20 ml Multiplex per 10 litre water). Spray 0.5% 13:0:46 and 0.5% D. A. P. (18.46), alternately, 6 times.Question: Crop: OnionVariety: GavaranOnion has been cultivated and the medicines have been used as you had suggested earlier.In spite of this, tips of the onion leaves are scorching.So, please suggest a remedy for this.Answer: Find out the exact cause of scorching the tips of onion leaves and use a remedy accordingly.If a disease appears, spray 0.5% Bordo mixture twice, with a gap of 8 days.If the pests appear, spray 20 gm Aciphate or 20 ml Metasystox with 10 litre water.If the onion crop is 1 to 1.5 months old, give the fertilizers as recommended.For spraying, use 5% neem seed extract, intermittently.Use organic fertilizers.Spray a fertilizer containing micronutrients, twice (e.g. 20 ml Multiplex per 10 litre water).Spray 0.5% 13:0:46 and 0.5% D. A. P. (18.46), alternately, 6 times.

Question: Crop: OnionVariety: GavaranAge: 60 daysDue to continuous rain, fertilizers could not be given in the field since the cultivation of onion. Sulphate has not been given to onion till now. If it is given now, what will be the consequences? Answer: You have asked for the information about sulphate in your question. Any sulphate is good for onion. A sulphate contains sulphur in it and the sulphur is an excellent fertilizer for onion. But it is of the following types: 1) ferrous sulphate, 2) magnesium sulphate, 3) copper sulphate. Please let us know the type of sulphate you will give so that dose of the fertilizer could be prescribed easily.Question: Crop: OnionVariety: GavaranAge: 60 daysDue to continuous rain, fertilizers could not be given in the field since the cultivation of onion.Sulphate has not been given to onion till now.If it is given now, what will be the consequences?Answer: You have asked for the information about sulphate in your question.Any sulphate is good for onion.A sulphate contains sulphur in it and the sulphur is an excellent fertilizer for onion.But it is of the following types: 1) ferrous sulphate, 2) magnesium sulphate, 3) copper sulphate. Please let us know the type of sulphate you will give so that dose of the fertilizer could be prescribed easily.

Question: Crop: ChilliVariety: JwalaEarlier, the Nashik Lal* onion which grows in the rainy season was cultivated in an acre. For this, 2 sacks of 20:20:0 fertilizer was used. The soil is black and of good quality. Now, I want to cultivate chilli. So please guide me. Answer: Information about the Pusa Jwala variety of chilli: 1) 400 to 500 gm seeds per acre should be taken.2) The saplings should be made on a rise bed.3) When the saplings become 15 cm high and 4 weeks old, they should be planted on a row bed, keeping a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm.4) While ploughing the field, 40 to 50 carts of farm yard manure, per hectare should be mixed in the soil.5) During the cultivation, 50 kg nitrogen + 50 kg phosphorus + 50 kg potassium should be given.6) 45 days after this, before cutting the grass, 50 kg nitrogen should be given.Question: Crop: ChilliVariety: JwalaEarlier, the Nashik Lal* onion which grows in the rainy season was cultivated in an acre.For this, 2 sacks of 20:20:0 fertilizer was used.The soil is black and of good quality.Now, I want to cultivate chilli.So please guide me.Answer: Information about the Pusa Jwala variety of chilli: 1) 400 to 500 gm seeds per acre should be taken.2) The saplings should be made on a rise bed.3) When the saplings become 15 cm high and 4 weeks old, they should be planted on a row bed, keeping a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm.4) While ploughing the field, 40 to 50 carts of farm yard manure, per hectare should be mixed in the soil.5) During the cultivation, 50 kg nitrogen + 50 kg phosphorus + 50 kg potassium should be given.6) 45 days after this, before cutting the grass, 50 kg nitrogen should be given.

Question: Crop: onionVariety: GavaranAge: 2 monthsPrevious crop: mungThe peripheral leaves of onion have bent and the tips are straight. Why does this happen and what is the remedy for this? 18:18:10 has been used earlier. Which fertilizer should be used after this? Answer: 1) Give fertilizers as per the soil-examination.2) Alternation of crops in a field is essential.3) Plough the soil in the sun and let it be heated for 1-2 months.4) For cultivation, choose a variety according to the season.5) Do not give any fertilizer to the crop after it has turned 2 months.6) At the beginning of the cultivation, it is essential to mix 4 kg Foret* and 300 kg neem cake, per acre in the soil.7) Water the crop only in a required quantity.8) Use a remedy after the problem has been identified.Question: Crop: onionVariety: GavaranAge: 2 monthsPrevious crop: mungThe peripheral leaves of onion have bent and the tips are straight.Why does this happen and what is the remedy for this?18:18:10 has been used earlier.Which fertilizer should be used after this?Answer: 1) Give fertilizers as per the soil-examination.2) Alternation of crops in a field is essential.3) Plough the soil in the sun and let it be heated for 1-2 months.4) For cultivation, choose a variety according to the season.5) Do not give any fertilizer to the crop after it has turned 2 months.6) At the beginning of the cultivation, it is essential to mix 4 kg Foret* and 300 kg neem cake, per acre in the soil.7) Water the crop only in a required quantity.8) Use a remedy after the problem has been identified.

Question: All the types of crops in our region (Khed, Rajagurunagar) are being affected by a disease called blight. What could be the cause behind it? Crops such as onion, potato, cabbage, cauliflower, flowers and vegetables are being cultivated in our region. Answer: A situation similar to blight appears due to various reasons. Due especially to the deficiency of potassium, it seems that blight has appeared. First, onion is affected by phulkid* and then blight appears on it. Many crops are affected by leaf miner in the beginning and then blight appears on them. The blight disease caused by fungus is related to the humidity in the air and the temperature.Use the following remedies to control this disease.1) First of all, carry out soil-examination and give the fertilizers accordingly.2) Cultivate the crops alternately; cultivate marigold occasionally.3) Every time, carry out the sprayings after diagnosing the disease.4) Water the crop as per the requirement and drain the water.5) Use the fungicides like Bavistin, blue copper, Dithane M-45.6) It is easy to control the blight in its initial stage; for that, visit the field regularly.7) Get the seeds from a disease-free place.8) Let the soil be heated after ploughing it in the sun.9) Mix the neem cake in the soil.Question: All the types of crops in our region (Khed, Rajagurunagar) are being affected by a disease called blight.What could be the cause behind it?Crops such as onion, potato, cabbage, cauliflower, flowers and vegetables are being cultivated in our region.Answer: A situation similar to blight appears due to various reasons.Due especially to the deficiency of potassium, it seems that blight has appeared.First, onion is affected by phulkid* and then blight appears on it.Many crops are affected by leaf miner in the beginning and then blight appears on them.The blight disease caused by fungus is related to the humidity in the air and the temperature.Use the following remedies to control this disease.1) First of all, carry out soil-examination and give the fertilizers accordingly.2) Cultivate the crops alternately; cultivate marigold occasionally.3) Every time, carry out the sprayings after diagnosing the disease.4) Water the crop as per the requirement and drain the water.5) Use the fungicides like Bavistin, blue copper, Dithane M-45.6) It is easy to control the blight in its initial stage; for that, visit the field regularly.7) Get the seeds from a disease-free place.8) Let the soil be heated after ploughing it in the sun.9) Mix the neem cake in the soil.

Question: We wish to start a kiosk-to-kiosk marketing of vegetables and fruits, using aAqua web site. The farmers will benefit by such type of marketing since kiosk is the middleman between a farmer and an agent. Please tell us something about this and send the list of kiosks. Answer: 1) Uruli Kanchan Kiosk: <ssdnsbh@indiatimes.com>2) Kendur Kiosk (Bharat Pachange): <yash_kiosk@mhpab.chiraag.com>3) Shikrapur Kiosk (Rajendra Patil): <patil_kiosk@mhpab.chiraag.com>4) Kadus Kiosk (Pramod Shinde): <pamshinde@yahoo.co.in>5) <vhargude@yahoo.co.in>6) Pimpale Jagtap Kiosk (Prashant Tambe): <prashantt77@yahoo.com>Question: We wish to start a kiosk-to-kiosk marketing of vegetables and fruits, using aAqua web site.The farmers will benefit by such type of marketing since kiosk is the middleman between a farmer and an agent.Please tell us something about this and send the list of kiosks.Answer: 1) Uruli Kanchan Kiosk: <ssdnsbh@indiatimes.com>2) Kendur Kiosk (Bharat Pachange): <yash_kiosk@mhpab.chiraag.com>3) Shikrapur Kiosk (Rajendra Patil): <patil_kiosk@mhpab.chiraag.com>4) Kadus Kiosk (Pramod Shinde): <pamshinde@yahoo.co.in>5) <vhargude@yahoo.co.in>6) Pimpale Jagtap Kiosk (Prashant Tambe): <prashantt77@yahoo.com>

Question: The Gavaran variety of onion in our field is one and a half months old. The leaves of the onion have been affected by yellow tick* and aphid. The leaves have started bending. Please suggest a remedy for this. Answer: To control the diseases of onion, called aphid and blight, 20 ml Rogar + 25 gm Bavistin + 10 ml Sticker* should be sprayed with 10 litre water.Question: The Gavaran variety of onion in our field is one and a half months old.The leaves of the onion have been affected by yellow tick* and aphid.The leaves have started bending.Please suggest a remedy for this.Answer: To control the diseases of onion, called aphid and blight, 20 ml Rogar + 25 gm Bavistin + 10 ml Sticker* should be sprayed with 10 litre water.

Question: Please give information about watermelon cultivation. Answer: Information about watermelon cultivation: You have purchased seeds of a hybrid variety.Cultivation should be done during December 20 to January 15. The soil should be ploughed and harrowed.The rows should be made keeping a distance of 2 to 2.5 ft. The water basins should be made on both the sides of the row keeping a distance of 1 meter. 2-3 seeds should be sown and 2 saplings should be planted in the water basin.4 kg each of decayed farm yard manure and Linden powder, 2.5 sacks of Super Phosphate, 30 kg potash, 200 kg neem cake, 4 kg of each zinc sulphate, magnesium sulphate and ferrous sulphate, per acre should be mixed in the basin.10 days later, 2 kg of each P. S. B., Azotobacter and Trichoderma, per acre should be given. A week later, 4 sacks of ammonium sulphate, per acre should be given in 3 steps, with a gap of 15 days. The fertilizers should be given according to soil-examination, by ring method.Remedies to control the diseases and pests: 1) Red beetles: 15 gm water-soluble Linden powder and 20 ml Malethion should be sprayed per 10 litre water.2) Fruit fly: The rotten fruits should be burnt. 20 ml Malethion + 100 gm jaggery should be sprayed with 10 litre water. The protector trap made by Kokan Krishi Vidyapeeth should be used.3) Leaf miner: 4 kg Phoret* or Thimate*, per acre should be mixed in the soil. 5 ml Cypermethrin should be sprayed per 10 litre water. 4 kg neem seed extract should be mixed in 100 litre water, filtered and sprayed.4) Powdery mildew: 5 gm Calaxine* or 10 ml Carathin or 10 gm Bavistin should be mixed in 10 litre water and sprayed. The crop should be watered in such a quantity that the moisture in the soil is maintained. The water should be allowed to drain in the soil. Precaution should be taken so that the vine does not wet. The fruits should be covered with dry grass. They should be protected from the Sun.Question: Please give information about watermelon cultivation.Answer: Information about watermelon cultivation: You have purchased seeds of a hybrid variety.Cultivation should be done during December 20 to January 15. The soil should be ploughed and harrowed.The rows should be made keeping a distance of 2 to 2.5 ft.The water basins should be made on both the sides of the row keeping a distance of 1 meter.2-3 seeds should be sown and 2 saplings should be planted in the water basin.4 kg each of decayed farm yard manure and Linden powder, 2.5 sacks of Super Phosphate, 30 kg potash, 200 kg neem cake, 4 kg of each zinc sulphate, magnesium sulphate and ferrous sulphate, per acre should be mixed in the basin.10 days later, 2 kg of each P. S. B., Azotobacter and Trichoderma, per acre should be given.A week later, 4 sacks of ammonium sulphate, per acre should be given in 3 steps, with a gap of 15 days.The fertilizers should be given according to soil-examination, by ring method.Remedies to control the diseases and pests: 1) Red beetles: 15 gm water-soluble Linden powder and 20 ml Malethion should be sprayed per 10 litre water.2) Fruit fly: The rotten fruits should be burnt. 20 ml Malethion + 100 gm jaggery should be sprayed with 10 litre water. The protector trap made by Kokan Krishi Vidyapeeth should be used.3) Leaf miner: 4 kg Phoret* or Thimate*, per acre should be mixed in the soil. 5 ml Cypermethrin should be sprayed per 10 litre water. 4 kg neem seed extract should be mixed in 100 litre water, filtered and sprayed.4) Powdery mildew: 5 gm Calaxine* or 10 ml Carathin or 10 gm Bavistin should be mixed in 10 litre water and sprayed. The crop should be watered in such a quantity that the moisture in the soil is maintained. The water should be allowed to drain in the soil. Precaution should be taken so that the vine does not wet. The fruits should be covered with dry grass. They should be protected from the Sun.

Question: The onion crop in my field has been affected by aphid. Which medicines should be used for this? Answer: Remedies to control the pests on onion: 1) 13 ml Monochrotophos should be sprayed with 10 litre water.2) If required, the second spraying of Neemark 5 percent (extract of neem seeds) should be carried out. For this, 5 kg neem seed powder should be soaked overnight in 100 litre water and it should be extracted in the morning.3) After the spraying of each insecticide, neem seed extract 5 percent should be sprayed.Question: The onion crop in my field has been affected by aphid.Which medicines should be used for this?Answer: Remedies to control the pests on onion: 1) 13 ml Monochrotophos should be sprayed with 10 litre water.2) If required, the second spraying of Neemark 5 percent (extract of neem seeds) should be carried out. For this, 5 kg neem seed powder should be soaked overnight in 100 litre water and it should be extracted in the morning.3) After the spraying of each insecticide, neem seed extract 5 percent should be sprayed.

Question: I want to cultivate chilli. For this, which variety should be used? Earlier, potato was cultivated. Please reply immediately. Answer: Information about new varieties of chilli and the methods of their cultivation: 1) The university has invented the improved varieties of chilli, namely, Phule Sai, Phule Jyoti, Phule Mukta, Phule Suryamukhi. Besides, the hybrid varieties called Maina (Nirmal), Namadhari, Sitara (Seminis) are cultivated.2) Between two saplings, keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq. cm for a hybrid variety.3) Prepare the saplings on a rise bed. Use 400 gm seeds per acre, for an improved variety and 130 gm seeds per acre, for a hybrid variety.4) At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailers of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash.5) Give 2.5 sacks of urea divided in 3 parts.6) Besides, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate.7) Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P. S. B. and Trichoderma.8) Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days.9) Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety.10) Spray 500 gm of a water soluble fertilizer with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.11) Spray according to the type of diseases and pests.Question: I want to cultivate chilli.For this, which variety should be used?Earlier, potato was cultivated.Please reply immediately.Answer: Information about new varieties of chilli and the methods of their cultivation: 1) The university has invented the improved varieties of chilli, namely, Phule Sai, Phule Jyoti, Phule Mukta, Phule Suryamukhi. Besides, the hybrid varieties called Maina (Nirmal), Namadhari, Sitara (Seminis) are cultivated.2) Between two saplings, keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq. cm for a hybrid variety.3) Prepare the saplings on a rise bed. Use 400 gm seeds per acre, for an improved variety and 130 gm seeds per acre, for a hybrid variety.4) At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailers of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash.5) Give 2.5 sacks of urea divided in 3 parts.6) Besides, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate.7) Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P.  S.  B.  and Trichoderma.8) Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days.9) Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety.10) Spray 500 gm of a water soluble fertilizer with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.11) Spray according to the type of diseases and pests.

Question: I want to cultivate chilli in the summer. Please guide me about the variety to be selected and the way it should be cultivated. Also, give information about capsicum. Answer: Information about new varieties of chilli and the methods of their cultivation: 1) The university has invented the improved varieties of chilli, namely, Phule Sai, Phule Jyoti, Phule Mukta, Phule Suryamukhi. Besides, the hybrid varieties called Maina (Nirmal), Namadhari, Sitara (Seminis) are cultivated.2) Between two saplings, keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq. cm for a hybrid variety.3) Prepare the saplings on a rise bed. Use 400 gm seeds per acre, for an improved variety and 130 gm seeds per acre, for a hybrid variety.4) At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailers of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash.5) Give 2.5 sacks of urea divided in 3 parts.6) Besides, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate.7) Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P. S. B. and Trichoderma.8) Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days.9) Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety.10) Spray 500 gm of a water soluble fertilizer with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.11) Spray according to the type of diseases and pests.Question: I want to cultivate chilli in the summer.Please guide me about the variety to be selected and the way it should be cultivated.Also, give information about capsicum.Answer: Information about new varieties of chilli and the methods of their cultivation: 1) The university has invented the improved varieties of chilli, namely, Phule Sai, Phule Jyoti, Phule Mukta, Phule Suryamukhi. Besides, the hybrid varieties called Maina (Nirmal), Namadhari, Sitara (Seminis) are cultivated.2) Between two saplings, keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq. cm for a hybrid variety.3) Prepare the saplings on a rise bed. Use 400 gm seeds per acre, for an improved variety and 130 gm seeds per acre, for a hybrid variety.4) At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailers of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash.5) Give 2.5 sacks of urea divided in 3 parts.6) Besides, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate.7) Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P.  S.  B.  and Trichoderma.8) Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days.9) Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety.10) Spray 500 gm of a water soluble fertilizer with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.11) Spray according to the type of diseases and pests.

Question: I wish to cultivate chilli. Which new variety should be used for this? Potato was cultivated before this crop. Please reply as soon as possible. Answer: Information about new varieties for chilli cultivation and the cultivation methods: New Varieties: The university has invented the following improved varieties of chilli: Phule Sai*, Phule Jyoti*, Phule Mukta* and Phule Suryamukhi*. Besides these, the hybrid varieties, namely, Maina* (Nirmal*), Namadhari* and Sitara* (Seminis*) are used.Methods of cultivation: Keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq. cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq. cm for a hybrid variety. The saplings should be prepared on a rise bed.Use 400 gm seeds of improved variety and 130 gm seeds of hybrid variety, per acre.At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailors of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash. Give 2.5 sacks of urea in 3 steps dividing it equally. Besides these, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate. Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P. S. B. and Trichoderma, per acre. Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days. Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety. Spray 500 gm of a water-soluble fertilizer, namely, 13:00:45 with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.Carry out sprayings according to the type of diseases and pests.Question: I wish to cultivate chilli.Which new variety should be used for this?Potato was cultivated before this crop.Please reply as soon as possible.Answer: Information about new varieties for chilli cultivation and the cultivation methods: New Varieties: The university has invented the following improved varieties of chilli: Phule Sai*, Phule Jyoti*, Phule Mukta* and Phule Suryamukhi*.Besides these, the hybrid varieties, namely, Maina* (Nirmal*), Namadhari* and Sitara* (Seminis*) are used.Methods of cultivation: Keep a distance of 60 X 45 sq.cm for an improved variety and that of 75 X 75 sq.cm for a hybrid variety.The saplings should be prepared on a rise bed.Use 400 gm seeds of improved variety and 130 gm seeds of hybrid variety, per acre.At the time of cultivation, give 4-5 trailors of farm yard manure, 350 kg neem cake, 3 sacks of Super Phosphate and 1 sack of potash.Give 2.5 sacks of urea in 3 steps dividing it equally.Besides these, give 7 kg of each of zinc sulphate, ferrous sulphate and manganese sulphate.Give 2 kg of each of Azotobacter, P. S. B. and Trichoderma, per acre.Spray 30 ml Planofix* with 100 litre water, with a gap of 20 days.Give a slightly smaller dose of fertilizer to an improved variety.Spray 500 gm of a water-soluble fertilizer, namely, 13:00:45 with 100 litre water, 5-6 times, with a gap of a week.Carry out sprayings according to the type of diseases and pests.

 

Question: Crop: SugarcaneAge: 2 monthsArea: 0.75 acreAt the time of cultivation, 4 sacks of Super Phosphate and 2 tractors of farm yard manure were given. At the time of the first cutting of grass* / weed*, 2 sacks of urea was given. Since 15-20 days, the sugarcane has been developing **Gabhe**, the inner part of sugarcane is decaying and is being affected by white maggots. The inner part, when removed, smells sourish. Should these inner parts be pulled off and removed? What remedy should be used for this? Also, which fertilizer should be used at the time of the third cutting of grass? Answer: The following remedies should be used to control the stem-pest on sugarcane.1) All the tips that have been affected by a stem-pest, should be removed. 2) 20 ml Endosulphan or 13 ml Monochrotophos or 12 ml Nuvan should be sprayed with 10 litre water.3) 15 days later, 2 Trichocards per acre should be used twice.4) 2.5 sacks of urea, 1 sack of Super Phosphate, 2 sacks of murate of potash, 10 kg zinc sulphate, 10 kg ferrous sulphate, 2 kg Borax and 200 kg neem cake should be given by mixing them. **Mothi Bandhani** should be done.Question: Crop: SugarcaneAge: 2 monthsArea: 0.75 acreAt the time of cultivation, 4 sacks of Super Phosphate and 2 tractors of farm yard manure were given. At the time of the first cutting of grass* / weed*, 2 sacks of urea was given. Since 15-20 days, the sugarcane has been developing **Gabhe**, the inner part of sugarcane is decaying and is being affected by white maggots. The inner part, when removed, smells sourish. Should these inner parts be pulled off and removed? What remedy should be used for this? Also, which fertilizer should be used at the time of the third cutting of grass? Answer: The following remedies should be used to control the stem-pest on sugarcane.1) All the tips that have been affected by a stem-pest, should be removed. 2) 20 ml Endosulphan or 13 ml Monochrotophos or 12 ml Nuvan should be sprayed with 10 litre water.3) 15 days later, 2 Trichocards per acre should be used twice.4) 2.5 sacks of urea, 1 sack of Super Phosphate, 2 sacks of murate of potash, 10 kg zinc sulphate, 10 kg ferrous sulphate, 2 kg Borax and 200 kg neem cake should be given by mixing them. **Mothi Bandhani** should be done.
